---
title: 'Rethinking the Economics of Land and Housing'
date: 2017-06-13
permalink: /posts/2012/08/blog-post-1/
tags:
  - housing
  - land economics
  - housing markets
---

Rethinking the Economics of Land and Housing
======
Book Metadata:
------
Year: 2017

Authors: Josh Ryan-Collins, Toby Lloyd & Laurie Macfarlane

Publisher: Zed Books Ltd.





The book opens by citing Piketty's *Capital in the Twenty-First Century* with the claim that residential land is the most valuable use of land in the modern capitalist economy. In continues in an eloquent discourse that gives a good overview to the economic, historic and political dimensions of land. Overall the book is a pleasant read with a reasonably balanced perspective and provides useful references.

Classical political economy and neoclassical economics are juxtaposed, specifically in their treatment of land. One the one side, David Richardo's "law of rent" and Henry George's *Progress and Povery* (1879) are used to argue that economic rent is not equivalent to profit from productivity. On the other side, John Bates Clark's marginal productivity theory is accused of implicitly assuming the opposite. With these references in mind, the core argument is a critique of neoclassic economic theory: assuming wages rise proportionally to productivity and there exists an inherent market self-regulation just doesn't account for increasing land prices. The core concern is that production is depended on capital and labour, but also land (which the authors claim has so far been ignored). This a reasonably well suported claim, given the length of the book, because of the brief historic detour of land ownership since feudalism in Europe, most notably the UK. 

Having established the importance of land, Ryan-Collins, Lloyd & Macfarlane proceed to creating the link between land, housing and how residential land has become so important. They do this through a historic narrative of land economics in the UK from the urbanisation trends in the 1800s to the modern housing markets after the 2010s.  In five thematic sub-sections the authors capture: the dire need for housing in the beginning of the industrial revolution, its development to a right in the two periods directly after the two world war efforts, the transition to housing as a good late post-war years after 1940 and its current status as an asset after liberal market reforms of the 1980s. Having set the scene, the authors shine light on the critical political paradox of housing: the desire to promote rising property values to ensure the benefits of ownership, whilst creating ownership opportunities for the next generation.

The final chapters of the book are dedicated to elaborating on what is seen as the mutual unsustainability of the two objectives. By triangulating between house price, incomes and bank credits, the authors argue that deregulated and securitised mortgages since the 1980s have lead to an increase in speculative real-estate value. Their core argument is that this increase drives demand for housing up further. This then leads to an information cascade, where households take out a disproportionate debt relative to their income. Citing Hyman Minsky and the application of this ideas to "Minskiyan households", Ryan-Collins, Lloyd & Macfarlane build on the concern previously argued that land and house prices can rise without any active production and add that this dampens wider economic growth. The authors conclude that without institutional regulation, boom-bust cycles that result from the stark financialisation of property are imminent because households will tend to take on exuberant debt to reap the benefits of owning, thereby making themselves financially vulnerable and less likely able to consume other market goods. 
 
The penultimate and final chapter of the book is concerned with the social impact of the land price dynamics, specifically inequality.  Citing the Wealth and Assets Survey of 2015, the book states that the UK household wealth is heavily invested in housing with a strong intergenerational divide between older, property-owning households and younger renter-households. The central thesis with regard to households is that "the rise in inequality, has been driven not by productive activity, but rather by increasing residential land values which have manifested themselves through rising house prices" (p173) - a fairly popular opinion in housing studies at the present. The final chapter of the book comprises of general policy directives for balancing the economic benefits of land for the common good and private ownership. Although articulate, these are in no way a definite panacea for the bifurbation of interests outlined above. Instead, the suggestions sums up the theoretical arguements in the book in a reasonably successful effort to ground the theoretical discourse into that real world.


